So tell me.
Tell me how this project started.
How did this come about?
Yeah.
Well... Let me just preface it by saying I'm really astounded by having seen two volumes of extraordinary letters by important women writers in the last year.
We had Elizabeth Bishop Slayer in the last year.
I think these are probably in that kind of a category, because they really are revelatory, aren't they?
In lieu of an autobiography, this more or less serves, do you think?
Why don't we use that as a watch?
Yeah, I certainly feel that it's a wonderful autobiography.
in part because it's a dialogue, and I think, one, you really show more of yourself in relationship to others, so that I think seeing Rachel in her dialogue with my grandmother, and we might even be seeing more of her than we would if she had just sat down by herself to tend her thoughts about herself.
Now, I interviewed Robert Giroux last year on the occasion of the Bishop List,
What was amazing about the Bishop Brothers is how carefully she crafted.
She really cared.
Even though it was correspondence, there was maybe this expectation that these would be read down the road, and they really had to be written well.
Do you sense a similar feeling here?
I do have a sense, I'm sure, that Rachel, she had mixed feelings about...
whether she wanted her private life to become more public at some time after her death.
But I think she definitely had a thought that through these letters that might be the case.
So I think I agree with you that she took care in writing these.
But also when you're dealing with people who are great writers in their lives, their letters are probably going to be pretty well written no matter what.
Well, have you ever looked at Hemingway's letters?
Well, yeah.
Great women writers?
Oh, I don't know.
Evelyn Water's letters are interesting.
They used to say, I forget which is which, but one of the letters were lovely, but the journal was a mess.
But they figured he wrote the letters in the morning when he was sober, and the journal at night when he was drunk.
That would be a great study.
In other words, they came out almost coincidentally at the same time.
These were entrusted to you by your grandmother.
What were the marching orders, so to speak?
Not a lot of marching orders, just that she had come to feel over the years that she had held them in her care.
That there was
new wonderful writing by Rachel Carson in there that maybe should see the light of day.
That was her interest in it, is just more wonderful writing by Rachel and the story of Silent Spring, I think.
And she cared a lot that I enjoy what I could learn from their friendship.
She cared a lot about me and I think felt that there was a lot for me to learn about.
becoming a woman in reading these.
Did these serve that?
Oh, yeah.
I'm really glad.
I mean, people ask me, wow, it took you so long.
It took you 12 years to get this done.
It didn't seem all that long to me.
I'm pretty glad that this book has come out when I'm kind of at midlife as opposed to when I was a lot younger, I think I got.
I don't think you could have done it as a younger woman.
No, I don't think I could have.
I don't think I would have had the feeling for the story.
I felt as I was reading, you know, that I, in part, you know, there's so much I felt, but one of the things was, wow, I am reading a great story, and I get the story of women's lives trying to deal with children and work and health and elderly parents and all that.
I get that now.
I wouldn't have gotten that.
Did it emerge for you as a narrative, as a continuing story?
It did.
And so tell me a little bit about the parameters.
I mean, did it have a beginning, a middle, and an end for you?
Like Pepys's diary, it does have a beginning, a middle, and even though it's a million and a half words or whatever, there is this literary quality to it.
Yeah, I felt that.
That, you know, there was the beginning of the relationship and all the excitement of that and the wanting to share
everything, everything they saw, everything they felt, everything they thought with each other.
And then the sort of settling down into accepting both of them feeling that this was a permanent and important relationship in their lives, that it was going to be there.
And so sharing more of the day-to-day and the story of Rachel as a writer.
And then the ending coming as...
The health problems began to emerge, and then Silent Spring.
All of that, that's sort of the muddle in the middle, is the health problems, the taking on Silent Spring, my grandparents' concern about what was going to be the public reaction, the public trauma that Rachel might go through as the author of that.
Would people understand?
Would they accept it?
real courage and strength and willpower and all that and then and sort of the resolution um the end of sort of for her the happy ending of silent spring in the midst of the very sad but i think she did live long just long enough just long enough to know and that's so wonderful yeah a great book yeah and so the satisfaction of knowing that she knew and then also that she had come to i think
real peace about her life.
Her life had been a long, full life, even though in many ways we would say it was too short, but she sure had lived.
Tell me a little bit about yourself, your own background, coming to the project.
Yeah, well, I'm a manor.
I went to Bates.
Did you?
My parents went to Bates, where they met.
You really went?
Oh, God, well, they graduated in 48.
Well before me.
Good for you.
Right.
I'm getting a little scared here.
You're your classmates now.
No, no.
Excuse me.
No.
So, I went to college in Massachusetts.
Where?
At Hampshire College in Amherst.
Nice school.
Yeah, great school.
Do you know Aaron Lansky out there?
You know who he is?
Yeah, yeah.
He's a skin in my book.
He's a national Jewish book set.
He's a fanatic about it.
preserving the language.
Yeah.
Well, Hampshire was great.
I was in the second class ever at Hampshire College.
So that was wonderful.
And I worked in Washington, D.C.
for the Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights at the end of my college career.
And then decided I really wanted to come back to Maine and thought I'd try law school, too.
So I did law school in Maine.
And then... And you stayed.
I stayed, yeah.
There's always a great concern with bright young people in Maine is that
Well, it's wonderful.
I mean, Maine is such a small pond.
You can become a medium-sized fish pretty easily, and you get to know everybody.
So everybody who's doing interesting things in Maine, you know.
I mean, everybody just knows everybody.
So you get to share, and just the entire community life of Maine is wonderful.
I don't know.
I'll put in a few blocks.
um my husband's gonna show up around 1 30 and he can wait for a bit okay good yeah um yeah so what part of maine do you live in um i live now i live in two places i live in hollywell which is near the state capitol because i worked for the maine legislature that's where i practice law
for 14 years, but I left this fall, and I'm now getting a master's degree in counseling at the university again in Portland.
So my husband and I have an apartment in Portland where they're during the week and back at our house for the weekend.
That's nice.
And your husband does what?
He's a professor of public policy, a graduate program in public policy, and director of something called the Muskie Institute at the university, which does... Right, right.
And so they do health care and child welfare research.
So, tell me about, you know, accepting.
Was it a challenge to you, or did you feel a responsibility, something that had to be done, or just a labor of love, or all of the above?
All of the above.
I guess I felt a little responsibility to read them.
How long did you have them?
I mean, were they kind of sitting in a box?
Fifteen years.
You had them for fifteen years?
Yeah.
So how old were you when you received them?
When I got them, I was twenty-five.
Not a kid.
No, no, not a kid.
No, no, but definitely less wise than I am.
But not a kid at all, but just getting out of law school and settling into my own family life and starting up my job and stuff like that.
So it took me three years to settle into that.
And then had more time when the legislature wasn't in session in the summers to start reading them.
And I felt, you know, my grandmother had told me these were special and that
I believe, when my grandmother told me things were special, then I should read them.
So I wanted to.
So that's the extent to which I felt it was a responsibility.
Are there any other family members to whom they could have been entrusted?
My father is my grandmother's only son.
Any siblings?
I have a brother.
I think she felt... She was one of my best friends.
She really was.
And so I think
She probably felt it was a thing for a woman, and I think she would have agreed.
Was there a sense of ceremony when they were turned over, or were they just... No, we started... I'm not reaching here, but I'm just... Yeah, no, no, I mean, it was no... I mean, I really feel a sense of... You really assumed a sense of great responsibility.
Yeah, I guess.
I just think, you know, my book is about the preservation of things.
Yeah, I'm so thrilled in the end having...
read read the letters and been moved by them and found them a great story and really found meaning that touched all kinds of aspects of my life i'm really thrilled to be able to share that experience with other people and have them be moved in whatever ways move them in their lives whatever meanings they find do they come to you chronologically like yeah
She and I got to spend some time together.
Pretty disgusting.
A couple winters, a couple years before she died.
On my visits to her, we would sit and talk about them a little bit, and she showed them.
And she sort of gave me a little glossary of some of their acute terms that are in there and what that means, so I would know.
And then she had them chronologically.
We kind of went through and made sure they were there.
And you read them in that order?
Yep, I did read them.
So it was an unfolding for you then?
It was an unfolding for me, yeah.
Did you start with any kind of, did you come to this with any baggage, so to speak, any preconceptions, or did you have any idea what you were going to learn?
Not really.
I knew, you know, I hadn't known because I had experienced it a bit, but I sure knew from my grandmother that, you know, Rachel was one of the dearest friends she ever had in life.
And so I had the sense that I was
definitely going to be allowed in to their friendship.
And I was curious about what Rachel would be writing behind the scenes as she was working in Silent Spring, what she would be saying about that experience.
But I felt, as I was reading them, I really felt, I wasn't startled by anything.
I felt, yep, these are the ladies I knew and this is my grandmother's love.
This is the quality of her notes, for sure.
Would you remember any thought in your mind that maybe you would use these letters as the raw material for a biography?
No, not for me.
Pretty soon into reading them, my strong feeling was, for my part, I wanted these women to be able to speak for themselves.
I didn't want the part of analyzing very much, and I'm not a big detail person, so I didn't want the part of making sure I'd gotten every date about every event in their lives.
I was happy with the amount of annotations I had to do.
I really wanted to tell their story and let them tell their story in their words, and other people can use
that for all kinds of academic... So really what you've done is furnish the raw material.
Yeah, that's what I wanted to do.
And hope that it's used carefully.
Yeah, and just give them the opportunity to speak in their voices before... It certainly had to be done posthumously with respect to your grandmother, I would think.
Or do you think that she would have... I don't know.
I think she had some thoughts in her 70s that maybe she might
pull it together and find a publisher or something.
But I think she realized by her mid-70s that that was going to be too much of a task for her.
It is understood that there was some discussion that some letters were expected to be destroyed.
Of course, we don't know whether they were or they weren't, but I gather these would have been totally personal things that had nothing to do with.
Yeah, I think the ones that aren't there are either the ones that weren't so interesting and they didn't bother to keep them to them, you know, that they wanted to hold on to.
And then my sense is some that were, as you say, more personal.
I think to some degree.
I get the feeling that my grandmother really served as Rachel's counselor.
You know, I don't want her therapist.
And I'm sure Rachel did the same for my grandmother a bit.
And I think they were very protective of their families.
And that they really were concerned if maybe they had some trouble with one of their family members.
They didn't want that lying around at all for anybody to stumble upon.
So I think those are gone.
So there were no surprises for you, actually?
I guess...
Not about their relationship.
I think I was surprised about, well, two things.
How ill Rachel was when she was doing Sun at Spring.
I mean, I know that cancer got her in the end.
But I guess I hadn't realized that it had been a long kind of ending and how long she really battled it and how ill she felt with that and that she'd had all these other illnesses too.
So I was pretty amazed by her fortitude in that.
And then, of course, my grandfather died four months before she did, so he died when I was ten.
And I had known he had had to have special diets and stuff as we were, as I was growing up with him.
But I guess I hadn't realized how ill he had been.
He died of a heart attack, and I had thought he just died of a heart attack, but his health really was declining, and how
stressful.
That must have been for my grandmother to see both of those people failing and how strong she was to be able to give them both so much support.
And then to carry on in her life, I mean, she, my grandmother, she loved life and she just made new friends, moved to Maine where she'd always wanted to live full time, married again, traveled in Europe.
She didn't
I think for her, loss was part of life, and you kept looking for life, you know.
I noticed you have some added connotations there.
I do.
Why is that?
Because sometimes interviewers ask me to pick a favorite letter, or they want me to point them to a letter on a certain subject.
So orange is the relationship, green is silence, yellow is more on sort of thoughts on immortality, and
of the health, kind of health issues that seem to be where people go to.
Do you have any favorites yourself?
My very favorite letters are that series that starts on February 6th, 1954, and there's a February 13th letter and a February 17th letter by Rachel.
And my grandmother's letters in that period don't exist, but it's just a long dialogue.
that they're caring about their relationship and reflecting on why they've come to care about each other so much.
And I love it because they touch on everything I can imagine about why, but in the end conclude we'll never know.
It's just a splendor and a mystery.
And I just love that sense of life.
You know, just be grateful when love walks in the door.
not try to categorize it or figure it out too much.
Just enjoy it.
That's a great quote.
I think in terms of quotes, I can see them in type, too.
Did you have to read all of Rachel Carson, of course, to prepare yourself?
Well, I had, you know, over the years when I was in college.
I read all of her books.
and i had read paul brooks's house of life professional biography of her um so i kept dipping back into those as i read these but i pretty much had a sense of what she had said in her books and in the contours of her life did he have access to these when he was working on them uh he did to some extent there are a couple of quotes from a couple of these letters in his book and i've got to ask him exactly how that went um
I'm not sure whether he knew their relationship, he knew their huge correspondence, and whether he asked my grandmother to pick out a couple, or whether he actually came and looked through the letters and picked out a few.
I'm not quite sure.
I know as a writer and a researcher, I desperately want to see them.
Right, right.
I wouldn't, frankly, imagine doing the book, knowing that his treasure trove exists.
Yeah.
Well, Paul, I know he felt that his
book was not going to be, you know, the complete biography.
He talks about his book as the professional biography of Rachel.
The emphasis is on her career, and you've got to know about her life to understand her career, but that he really wanted to preserve her posterity, the story of her career more than her personal life.
But certainly she talks about the work here.
It's a great extent, isn't it?
Yeah.
I'm amazed at how shy she is about, not shy, but concerned about hurting people's feelings with the things that she's writing.
I mean, I'm a real pro, because she doesn't worry about that at all.
All right.
You do it, and you just pray that it's correct.
Yeah.
And there's that libeless.
And then you work.
Yeah.
You put it out there and it needs to be fair.
Always be fair.
Yeah, yeah.
You're right.
I don't think the woman could ever be accused of being spiteful or vicious.
No, no.
I don't know if she just was an extra sensitive personality in ways or, you know, a woman of her time writing about what was unorthodox stuff for a woman of her time.
I mean, being a scientist and, you know, whether she was sort of hypersensitive to
just her position and, you know, not wanting to rock the boat.
I'm not sure where that came from.
I agree with you, though.
I read someplace or heard someplace that Al Gore said he wrote his book on the environment with a picture of Rachel over his shoulder.
Yeah, he did in Earth and the Balance.
And he's also just written a wonderful new introduction to yet another publication of Silent Spring in which he, yeah.
I've got a first edition of that book.
Do you?
Good for you.
I think it's, you know, one of the reasons I could do what I write about.
Fashion for books.
But that's it.
You know, you talk about, you know, books that change things.
Ian Fleming, you know, had a wonderful, had an extraordinary book collection.
You know, the James Bond guy.
And his collection was about books that made things happen.
In any different way.
It could be Baden-Powell and the Boy Scouts.
It could be
like Ava Curie on this, you know, or whatever.
You know, you'd have to put, I mean, he died before this was published, I think, but certainly, of course, before the impact was fully assessed, but you'd have to certainly have influential books of the 20th century.
No, I would.
I would.
I mean, I think she was the right person to write at the right time about
a subject, and it wasn't just pesticides.
Oh, an attitude.
It was an attitude, and we needed a shift in perspective, and she just was able to articulate that shift that everybody could get it, even though some people were very unhappy about it.
I mean, everything.
The ozone stems, I think, from this awareness.
Absolutely.
And the fact that it's, you know, this place
is small enough to destroy, isn't it?
And things are irreparable, I think.
Absolutely.
We are all interconnected.
Before Rachel, we somehow thought we lived separately.
Somehow, you know, you could pollute and it wouldn't come back and bite you.
Now you sort of can't imagine thinking that way.
I understand you were interviewing an NPR?
I've done...
Living on Earth, the U.R.
program, and I did Maine Public Radio.
And are they generally interested in a commentary on Rachel and the influence of her work, or are they on the colloquy between the environmental and the HR?
It depends.
I think Living on Earth, the environmental program was... They asked about their relationship, too, but they wanted commentary.
the environmental consciousness she brought to us and what we learned about Silent Spring in here.
Other interviewers, their slant is just more on women of their era, the relationship, you know, so what was it?
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I haven't.
I noticed you haven't, yeah.
Whatever.
So, I don't know.
I guess I feel it's
Everybody's bringing their own perspective and their own interests to bear on the book, and it's great for me that people of all different interests can find something that's enthralling to them about this story.
Whatever it is, it's kind of amazing.
Do you consider yourself a writer?
Yeah.
I mean, I went into the law because I love to write,
And actually, in part because my grandmother told me, and I was interested in the law, but not much of the profession of the law, but I liked the law itself as a humanity.
And I didn't know whether I really wanted to do law school, and my grandmother said, well, Rachel always said it was helpful to have something to write about, which I thought was good advice.
So I've been, you know, I've written, my job with the legislature was to write a lot of law, and so I like that, and I,
I write my journals.
I write poetry.
But I'm thinking more part of my midlife shift is to want to be able to try out more of my own writing.
Do you like nonfiction?
You mentioned poetry.
Yeah.
I like, probably I'll stick with nonfiction for a while.
Maybe I'll wander off into fiction.
Did it ever become tedious or boring for you?
Or did you ever say, well, my God, what have I gotten myself into it?
No, no, never, never to that extent.
No, I mean, I loved, I loved, I just loved the story.
I loved, I loved the writing.
I loved my grandmother so much.
And I came to love Rachel even more, to know her more and love her more.
There were times when I thought I was drowning in paper.
You know, I just couldn't believe, you know, the pile of notebooks to keep track of and then to keep track of
the letters and then to keep track of the annotations and um i was i worried at times about whether i'd keep track of it all but i had wonderful people helping me organize that was a 12-year project yeah and at what point did you did you have a publisher uh faith in the early going it was it was faith and uh i mean just partly i knew this was going to be valuable to me if nobody else ever read these letters it sure was going to
be a wonderful thing for me to do for my life.
So I was happy to do it.
And then I really hoped to be able to share it.
And, you know, I had to work along getting it in shape and getting permission from the Carson Trust and stuff before I could really approach a publisher.
So I had to work on that stuff.
And this isn't for my piece, but I'm surprised that Houghton didn't publish it.
Did you go to Houghton with it?
Well, the way I found Beacon was with Paul Brooks' help.
I'm delighted that I could write something about them.
I haven't written them in years, and this pleases me.
You know, I know no other publisher, but I can't imagine having done this with anybody but Beacon.
They've been so supportive.
Perfect book.
Tasteful.
I mean, their list is, you know, just kind of fits in with books.
Yeah.
They like women's issues and serious books, and they like to do good books, and they do them well.
Yep, yep, they do.
They do.
So Paul, I think, touched base with Houghton, and then, I don't know whether it was Houghton or Paul who got in touch with Beacon.
Great.
Houghton's changed, and... Well, that's what Paul said.
You know, he said, really, Beacon's kind of where Houghton was when Rachel was writing.
I think that's true.
When I was working, you know, I was working on a lot.
It's, you know, I haven't questioned you about the substance of the letters.
They speak for themselves.
Pardon me, but I really do like the idea that
There is continuity and there is story here, isn't there?
There is.
I really think there is.
What do you think, what do you hope the reader comes away with?
I mean, obviously, there would be no book if there wasn't a Rachel.
I mean, even if the letters were the letters and these two wonderfully sensitive and articulate women were corresponding, as wonderful as they are, you still have to have a Rachel to justify their publication.
Exactly right.
Yeah.
And so I hope...
In that respect, I really hope that readers will get to know Rachel in many more dimensions.
And for me, part of what she was doing in these letters was working out her heart, which I think is part of the genius of her other published writings, is that Rachel understood
nature and biology not just with her intellect she really understood it with her heart she felt what it was like to be those little creatures who lived in her tide pools and she loved them and i think she was she was expressing that and working on that expression in these letters and that that is the power behind her scientific writing that's why silent spring
impacted us the way it did i think was because it wasn't just dry science it was powered by this woman's heart oh it's a it's a literary work yeah exactly right it goes it has that extra element yeah so uh which which does distinguish it yeah it's not enough to be important and significant no but it really does it moves you it has patterns yeah
It does.
In its own way.
There's passion and there's power.
Yep.
And resonance is all critics' words.
Right.
Well, they're the right words.
It's true.
In the end, to move people, if you just move their heads, you're not going to move them where we need to go to really make shifts.
And she was able to talk to us on another level, too.
And I think she was working that out a little bit in this.
And I also hope that people just reflect on
sort of friendship, I mean, however you want to define that, whatever that means in your life, just sort of broadly, the importance of friendship.
And I certainly have reflected a lot on, you know, how much time I choose to invest in my life in caring for others and accepting others' caring into my life.
as opposed to how much time and attention I put on going to work.
One of the sad ironies of it all is how lonely she was at the end.
Yeah, yeah.
If you could change history just a tad, give her a quarter of a turn, what would you have hoped to have done?
I mean, maybe allow them greater proximity to one another, I guess, would be.
I don't know.
Yeah, I don't know.
I guess if I could have changed history a little bit, I would have hoped for Rachel that maybe she wouldn't have taken on as single-handedly as she did some of the trials and tribulations of her family.
That she might have found a little more space for her own personal life and the energy she had for personal relationships.
was largely devoted to her family.
And I think her relationship with my grandmother fit into that because it was primarily in letters.
My parents and I figured out that in the 12 years they knew each other, they probably were in each other's presence for less than two years.
And I think that worked for Rachel because she could choose to have this relationship when she had the time.
She could write after midnight as opposed to if people are...
right up against you, well, you gotta, when they say they need you, maybe you gotta give them the time.
So you think it was decidedly a relationship that was bonded by correspondence?
That maybe it wouldn't have been the same had there been a closer partner?
Yeah, I'm not sure, you know, but I think, yeah, who can say?
It's one of the mysteries.
But for sure, because of
either their choice or circumstances foisted it upon them.
The correspondence was the namesake of their relationship.
Do you think because they spent such relatively little time together, do you think it was idealized to any extent?
Do you think it was something that it wasn't?
Something that really existed?
Yeah, I think it probably was.
They got to dwell on the happier parts of relationship more than those of us who have to take out the garbage with each other and stuff, maybe.
You know, they got to smooth over those rough spots maybe a little more easily.
when you're really just living and slogging through daily life with somebody.
She didn't look to your grandmother for criticism so much in her work.
Now, that's one difference in seeing Bishop's work.
She's the professional writer here, corresponding with other professional writers, and she says, if you can't take this, I'm not going to write to you.
I want to tell you this stinks.
She doesn't quite say it like that.
She wants the same kind of, I hate the word feedback, but she wants the same response.
no i got the sense she looked at my grandmother in that sense more for just my grandmother's ear you know not her uh not real literary criticism in any sense but does this hold your interest as a reader that's all i want to know what they did with my book incidentally they hired a woman they called a cold reader
just to read a book out of the woodwork.
Oh, man, I would love a job like that.
And my agent said, gee, that's great.
And I said, she loved it.
She loved it.
It was great.
But, you know, that's kind of what you're saying.
How does this play?
Or am I boring you?
Am I boring you?
Is this becoming tedious?
Is it not significant?
You know, and Rachel says at one point in here that that's a role her mother used to play for her.
But her mother was
aging and failing and i think it's just sort of something my grandmother that's one piece that my grandmother was able to kind of fill in rachel's life i i sense also that it's a symbiotic relationship it's not one way in any direction no i think they do feed each other yep yeah no i think they do i think rachel did many things for my grandmother
My grandmother had always cared about writing and, you know, I've got her attempts at essays and stories.
And she was encouraged.
By Rachel.
Yep.
And yet I don't think she was ever going to have perhaps the skill or the discipline or, you know, the single-mindedness to do that.
And so my grandmother kind of got to have her, her literary form became the letter.
So she got her audience.
And then my grandmother certainly was passionate long before she knew Rachel about nature.
And she got to be a teacher of her knowledge of nature a little bit to Rachel, just if only Southport.
And what were the circumstances of their meeting again?
Just that Rachel, my grandmother, had read in the local Southport newspaper that Rachel was building a cottage five minutes away from our cottage, so she wrote a welcoming note when they met that summer.
Karma.
Karma, yeah, all that they shared.
Kindred spirits.
Well, can I ask you, have I missed anything?
What would you like?
Let me just say, by the way, it's in Greensburg, Pennsylvania.
When I pitched it, they said, oh, I'm dying to get a piece on this, because, you know.
She's from around there, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Please, can I have it by April 9th?
I mean, I don't know why that's, because she wants to run it by the 16th.
I don't know what's going on, whether it's Earth Day on the 22nd or something, but.
She really wanted it, wants it by the night.
That's why I moved you ahead of a number of others.
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
You know, I can't think of anything.
You're a good interviewer.
I've covered it.
I think you have.
Yeah, I mean, my job is to read the book.
My job is to read the book, and to ask you to do my work for me.
Yeah.
No, I guess my hope is that people do open the cover.
And I feel that if they will open the cover and just start reading, they'll get carried along.
So you must have a great feeling of satisfaction.
Yeah, I do.
I do.
It's also kind of an out-of-body experience.
It's a little hard to process while it's happening because I lived alone with it.
for so long and I knew it really meant a lot to me.
You never despaired.
No, I didn't.
You knew it would be finished.
I knew I would finish it.
I wondered how the heck old am I going to be when I finish this.
But I did wonder if... I trusted in my feelings about it that it really was important for me and that I would be able to tell the story to friends and family and that it wouldn't be meaningful for them.
But I didn't know if it would be beyond
my circle and uh you know to have diane or me my editor um call and have her say wow i mean that was an incredible experience but it wasn't just me it wasn't just in my head and heart but it was something to touch everybody so just if you could give me the numbers how many letters are there all together and and
yeah um saved in the collection in the collection that i have is about 750 and there are about 500 of them yeah yeah and i really think dm was a great help we really wanted i very much wanted to hit every subject everything that's in that course there's nothing i wanted to leave out that's great yeah so with 500 we were able to get it all in
And what was the first printing deal off then?
I think $25,000.
Really?
Do you think?
That's terrific.
It's getting wonderful.
Buds.
Oh yeah, that's good to hear from you.
I've had a good review of the New York Times.
I've had a good review of her, too.
They did.
I mean, darn, I mean, she was like a main guy.
Yeah, so she can really get that.
She's a major, major figure.
Yeah.
And they did it right on time.
They did do it right on time.
I think you watched them posting it.
You know, I've heard that and I didn't know that.
I didn't know that.
I was trying to get it accurate.
Wow.
You're excited.
I am excited and I can take, you know, I can just, in a way, I can be completely thrilled and proud and everything because it's their writing.
You know, and I'm happy to be a midwife.
But I'm just
I am so thrilled that other people are... I was right, there is something in this for other people to enjoy.
Rachel was, would you describe her as a crusader?
She wasn't a crusader per se, was she?
You know, that's interesting.
I mean, she wasn't a Margaret Sanger or something, you know, who risked her in jail?
No.
And the rest and stuff like that.
No, she wasn't a crusader.
What would the word be for her?
I mean, she sure was dedicated.
Yeah.
to the environment, and she sure was certain of her perspective on it.
But Crusader doesn't sound sort of patient and quiet and deliberate enough.
Rachel was sort of, she was in it all for the long haul and the quiet build-up, just kind of overwhelming you with...
the strength of her convictions i think and the strength of her argument she really wanted to persuade you she didn't want to force you into something she wanted to persuade you as a woman is she ahead of her time yeah and more so you know i always thought of her as a public figure who was a bit ahead of her times as a woman writing about the subjects she was writing about but now when i read of her family life i think you know most women in the early 50s and she started in the 30s aren't the people who
at that time are the caretakers and breadwinners for a household.
Lots of women my age are doing that now, but at her time, there she is sitting there doing her taxes, contemplating her financial situation, taking care of her mother's health problems, administering medication, trying to understand a five-year-old boy, trying to write about
all this scientific stuff deal with her agents deal with her publishers you know that sounds like a very modern woman so i think she was kind of pioneering in that way i'm not sure she knew it she probably just thought her family was kind of strange i can't think of anything else do you have a phone number where i can reach you yeah two let me give you